# First post

I actually wanted my first post here to be about AI, and be opinionated on how AI is not being controlled or contained properly, how data privacy has been reversed to collection being the new norm, and what to do about that. But I find it so much more difficult to write such an article, where I want to get all my facts straight and where I learn a lot by doing some research — learn things that make what I wanted to say all the more difficult to say — than to write something about my own experiences. I guess I'm just too self-centered (like anyone else, maybe?) and find it easier to write about things very close at home. Plus, very little research needed. Maybe the more difficult, more interesting, and more opinionated blog posts come later.

The thing is, I was forced to do without a properly working phone for about two weeks, and that actually really confronted me with how our western-european society is currently centered on smartphones already. The background of this is that my old phone needed repairs, and I borrowed an old oneplus one from a colleague: the phone is a smartphone and can install and run signal, but browsing is a nightmare, and the phone is no longer supported by many, many apps. And despite having travelled in many countries now, with usually no internet access, I was actually really properly suprised to have to do without a smartphone in europe for an extended period of time.

## Internet-centered services

Why is it so different in Europe (Austria) than in, say, Mexico to have to do without a phone? Well, for one I usually did have internet access there during important times or certain times of the day, and I wasn't used to living in those areas. I had planned to go to Tirol for two days, so including an overnight stay. In Tirol, and I would expect most western-european countries, you cannot just show up in a town and look for a place to stay: tourism has tiered towards luxury, so for one the prices are just too high to try that approach — unlike Latin America and East africa, where you will always find something and a lot of places are not online yet. Secondly, there is always a big risk of all hotels being full, which is (in my view) related to the first point. Now of course you can look for hotels online on your pc, but I need my phone for completing the transaction through the booking sites; paying by invoice is usually not an option. The situation is not just that our world is all online, but that our world is completely smartphone-centered. There are of course payment platforms where this is not necessarily the case — _if_ they really do not require some form of authentication through your smartphone — like paypal, but I have gotten qualms with paypal having gotten to know the story behind it. Maybe I will talk about that once I have read more about the Paypal Maffia.

By the way, I did go to a bank location to make a transaction, and this has also become digitalized in a very interesting way. It is not like it was, say, twenty years ago, where you fill in a slip and post it or drop it in somewhere; instead, I had to fill in a slip with all payment information, and then have a machine at the bank read that for me. I was not, however, able to do the entire transaction digitally (presumably because of security reasons), and so the process has been optimized compared to how it once was — the payment was instant — yet still relying on filling in the transaction slips. I had no idea these still existed, but I was happy they did.

Ok, so next up, although this is not chronological order per se, is buying a train ticket. This one should be nothing new, because in Austria you have ticket machines everywhere where you can still do this, and they are used profusely. 

### The offline penalty

I actually wanted to buy a _Vorteilskarte_ first, so had to go to the ticket shop and customer helpdesk of the Oebb on the station, because, of course, I could not buy this without a phone. No big deal, I have done that before. However, I also wanted to immediately buy a ticket with that Vorteilskarte to Tirol. The lady behind the desk — who had a slight cold, which is a human touch that you will also not encounter in software — told me the price, and I was a bit confused. After repeating, she immediately added: 
> -- oh yes, it is cheaper if you buy the ticket for you in the machine outside, with me it is more expensive. 
> -- Excuse me? 
> -- Yes, it is cheaper if you buy the ticket for you at the machine, the price for the bike and for the discount card is the same with me, though.
I was rather shocked at this, although I have not yet reached out the Oebb to verify and ask for justification, but this seems to be an unfair penalty for people who just want to go to the customer service to buy a ticket; using machines is certainly _not_ always easier. (I tried to make a seat-reservation on the machine, and I could not find the option to do so after looking for five minutes!) It is raising prices at the cost of the customer and elderly people, in favour of getting rid of providing a necessary service. I will try to follow up on this and find out if this is actually allowed according to _Verbraucherschutzrecht_ (consumer rights)...

## Personal interaction

And of course not being able to ask your phone for everything brings up the cliché of more 'personal interaction'. Being not able to look on a map on my phone (and being so used to constantly look on the map for everything), and my navigation device not coming in handy for looking for specific things, I had to ask for directions to the train station in Landeck-Zams. I asked someone sitting outside of a local supermarket, and he was clearly delighted to be spoken to; he was obviously foreign but spoke decent German, but was just not used to being addressed by anyone. He gave me direction and, after I had bought a few things in the store, wanted to know where I was from, wanted to share with me his love for Ajax (the footbal club), and wanted to tell me about Ghana where he was from. Now I am certainly not the biggest fan of random conversations with strangers, but to meet someone this in need of personal interaction that he is surprised that anyone talks to them — even a simple question — was surprising. We do not have to ignore other people.

Well, I say that, but at the train station some other guy approached me randomly and wanted to share how he used to do cycling but could not anymore because of his beer belly and yadie yadie yadie, and that was certainly too much. For one, he is one like so many. Second, the way a conversation starts really contributes a huge part towards that conversation making sense. This one didn't. (It wasn't even a conversation, and I just cut him off and went outside.)

I will probably update this with further memories, but the takeaway message is clear: our society has changed a lot more due to smartphones than we, or at least I, have realized. And certainly not always in a good way; although I am happy to now have a working one again, because they do come in handy for many things. Like doing my online payments.

Of course this post comes after the study in Austria showing that for children, there were significant declines in depression and increase of mental well-being. I cannot attest to this; but I think multiple arguments can be made for sometimes being aware of our usage of smartphones.